
# 2022.05

Memory Contexts in PostgreSQL https://jnidzwetzki.github.io/2022/05/28/postgres-memory-context.html
- > The PostgreSQL database server is written in the programming language C. This article describes how dynamic memory is handled in the PostgreSQL database server. In contrast to plain C programs, `MemoryContexts` are used.
- > The PostgreSQL database server is written in C, like many database management systems. This programming language does not contain a garbage collector and offers the developer with the functions `malloc()` and `free()` a way to request and release memory dynamically. Even though this is a well-known concept, handling memory this way is error-prone because the developer is responsible for keeping track of the memory allocations. When memory is requested and no longer be used, it has to be manually released (i.e., by calling `free()`). If the memory is not released, it stays allocated even when no reference to this memory area exists. This is called a [`memory-leak`](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Memory_leak). When the program executes the same error-prone block, again and again, the consumed amount of memory grows and grows until all available memory is requested and the operating system (i.e., the [Out Of Memory Killer](https://www.kernel.org/doc/gorman/html/understand/understand016.html) terminates the program).
- > Memory leaks and the risk of being terminated by the operating system are problematic for long-running processes such as database servers. To solve this problem, PostgreSQL uses memory contexts to keep track of requested memory.
- > **MemoryContexts**
- > **Create and use MemoryContexts**
- > **Reset and Delete MemoryContexts**
- > **Callbacks**
  * > Sometimes it could be useful to perform tasks when a memory context is deleted or reset (e.g., perform some cleanup tasks). To accomplish this, Postgres provides callbacks, that are executed when a memory context is deleted or reset. To register a callback on a memory context, the function `MemoryContextRegisterResetCallback(MemoryContext context, MemoryContextCallback *cb)` can be used. This function takes a memory context and a callback as a parameter.
  * > For example, to execute the function `my_callback_func` with the pointer `my_data` as a parameter as soon as the memory context `my_ctx` is reset or deleted, the following code can be used:
    ```c
    MemoryContextCallback *callback = (MemoryContextCallback *) MemoryContextAllocZero(my_ctx, sizeof(MemoryContextCallback));
    callback->func = my_callback_func;
    callback->arg = (void *) my_data;
    MemoryContextRegisterResetCallback(my_ctx, callback);
    ```
- > **Information about the used memory**
  * > To get more information, how large the existing memory contexts are, the function `MemoryContextStats(TopMemoryContext)` can be called in PostgreSQL. To invoke the function, a debugger can be used.
    ```sh
    gdb -p <pid of the postgres process>

    MemoryContextStats(TopMemoryContext)
    ```
  * > After the function is called, the Postgres process writes information about all existing memory context and their current usage into the default logfile.
    ```console
    TopMemoryContext: 68720 total in 5 blocks; 14624 free (15 chunks); 54096 used
      RowDescriptionContext: 8192 total in 1 blocks; 6880 free (0 chunks); 1312 used
      MessageContext: 8192 total in 1 blocks; 6880 free (1 chunks); 1312 used
      Operator class cache: 8192 total in 1 blocks; 512 free (0 chunks); 7680 used
      smgr relation table: 16384 total in 2 blocks; 4544 free (3 chunks); 11840 used
      TransactionAbortContext: 32768 total in 1 blocks; 32504 free (0 chunks); 264 used
      Portal hash: 8192 total in 1 blocks; 512 free (0 chunks); 7680 used
      TopPortalContext: 8192 total in 1 blocks; 7928 free (0 chunks); 264 used
      Relcache by OID: 16384 total in 2 blocks; 3424 free (3 chunks); 12960 used
      CacheMemoryContext: 524288 total in 7 blocks; 134280 free (3 chunks); 390008 used
        index info: 2048 total in 2 blocks; 408 free (1 chunks); 1640 used: pg_db_role_setting_databaseid_rol_index
        index info: 3072 total in 2 blocks; 1088 free (2 chunks); 1984 used: pg_opclass_am_name_nsp_index
        index info: 2048 total in 2 blocks; 880 free (1 chunks); 1168 used: pg_foreign_data_wrapper_name_index
        index info: 2048 total in 2 blocks; 912 free (2 chunks); 1136 used: pg_enum_oid_index
        index info: 2048 total in 2 blocks; 616 free (1 chunks); 1432 used: pg_class_relname_nsp_index
    [...]
    ```
  * > **Note**: As an alternative to the debugger you can also call the function `pg_log_backend_memory_contexts(PID)` in PostgreSQL (e.g., `SELECT * FROM pg_log_backend_memory_contexts(1234);`). The function also dumps the statistics about the memory context of the process into the logfile.
